
IMW Sit Down

Sit Down:

The Panel:
	Mary Margaret MW (Screaming Eagle)
	Cathy Corison
	Todd Mostero (sp?) - dir. of viti and winemaking at Dominus
	Chris Carpenter (Lokoya)
	Jean Viev Jensons - Mondavi (dir. of winemaking since 1997)
	Beth Novak Milliken - Spottswoode
	Rob McCollough MW - helping in winemaking this vintage at Spottswoode

2012 vs. 2013
	Mary Margaret / Screaming Eagle - 12 is more fruit driven. 13 is more muscular, structured, for laying down.

	Corison: no heat spikes in either vintage. 13 was early - early budbreak. Didn't get spiky until June (which affects quantity more than quality). Nights were cool in both vintages. 2013 was a high-yielding vintage. Drought year - only rained 4 inches before harvest. 2012's tend to be a little more structured thatn 2013's (opposite of what Mary Margaret said). 

	Todd Mostero - agreed that lack of heat spikes made the wines so good. 

	Chris Carpenter - yeah, no heat spikes. When flavor and sugar are developing, the rise in heat drives sugar more than flavor. So it's nice when there's no heat spikes, you can make decisions based on flavor, not on sugar. 
		at 5:30pm it's the hottest part of the day. If you have a north-south vineyard, fruit gets burnt (unripe raisins). So they shifted the orientation to east-west planting (the shift took 30 years). 
		Density: originally was 10'x12' planting, but shifting to 9'x4'. There are underground springs that allow dry farming and denser planting. But can't go to 1mx1m like in Bordeaux because we don't have summer rains. 
		California sprawl --> went from Vertical trellising to a U-shape (so fruit at the bottom is protected by the canopy). Fruit still got burnt. Tried a V. Then tried a Y - protects the grapes both at Mid-Day and later in the day. 

	Jean Viev Jensons - To Kalon has a lot of structure. 2013 was difficult - too much structure. Wasn't super happy in the vineyard in 2013. Extracting tannin too fast during fermentation - not very happy. But then tannin evolved very graciously (though not quickly). 

	Rob McCollough MW - the difference is tannin extraction. In Spottswoode - 2012 had a larger berry size. Relatively less concentrated compared to 2013. Extraction needed to be pushed more (heat is the main force - also agitation, liquid contact, heat, contact with alcohol). Aron believes heat is the main driver. In 2012, kept post-fermentation maceration hot (84F, 28.5 C) and long (.
---------
Wines: 

Corison Kronos
"Does a risky fermentation - inoculated with a strong finisher but doesn't use SO2 before Malo. I wouldn't do it with anyone else's fruit, but I've been doing it for 30 years." - Cathy

    2012 - Vibrant medium ruby in the glass. Tight nose of blackcurrant, slight cedary oak, cherry. Ripe - no pyrazines noticeable. 
    Medium plus body, medium alcohol - feels 13.5%, medium plus acid, medium plus tannins. Not particularly savage. Oak presents as cedary baking spices - still a touch un-integrated, but modest. Fresh acid. 
    Around 9

    2013 - Dark Ruby, opaque. Much more expressive than the '12 - modest brett, slight savory stewed bell pepper savoriness. Darker on the palate - more concentrated, higher tannin. Modest alcohol still. Great flavor concentration. Fresh acid. 
    Around 9-9.5

Dominus
	"native fermentations" are often commercial yeasts that have come in. Dominus does sample fermentations, then PCRs them to identify indigenous yeasts. They inoculate with 3 indigenous yeasts, and only one has the performance to complete fermentation. They don't do simultaneous inoculation of yeast and lactobaccili. 

    2012 - Beautiful nose - more pyrazinic than the others. Shades of blackcurrant, shades of stewed bell peppers, green olive (salvadorean tamales), brown olive, black liquorice, very faint dusting of baking spices (well-integrated oak). More prominent pyrazines than the others. Tannins are only medium plus. 
    9

    2013 - Dark nose - slight black olive, savory mixed with many shades of blackcurrant. Clean and complex. Tannic beast on the palate. Elevated alcohol but in balance - maybe 14-14.5? Has medium plus acid, medium plus tannins (chewy and beautiful). Long finish. Dense, charged. 
    9-9.5

Lokoya Spring Mountain
	Does native fermentation - has strong yeasts that live in the winery. 

	Chris makes four Lokoyas: Diamond, Howell, Veeder, and Spring mtn. 
	Chris emphasized the tactile sense of wine - his are lusher than the others on the panel, and maybe this tactile emphasis is part of it.

    2012 - Darker, riper fruit than the Corisons or Dominus - impressions of almost-raisinated blackcurrant. Elevated alcohol - feels 14.5-15. No pyrazines, feels rich, medium plus tannins. Acid is a bit lower than the corisons. 
    A bit sluggish for me. 8.5-9

    2013 - High tannins - still rich, hint of cherry cough syrup, but good blackcurrant fruit. Well-integrated oak. 
    Dry (but ripe). M+ body, high alcohol (14.5%), m+ acid but I would like a bit more, high tannins. 
    8.5-9. 
Mondavi Reserve To Kalon - neither of these seem to have black fruit or pyrazines. Maybe Black Cherry. Lean, tannic, high acid. 
    2012 - Not very aromatic. Lean, elevated acid, high alcohol, high tannins. Not a lot of fruit. Almost red-fruited. It has a ripeness to the palate - a bit sweet, but I'm not getting much in the way of black fruit - I get mostly cinnamon/clove baking spices from oak.
    7% cab franc, 3% petit verdot
    8.5-9

    2013 - Super crazy tannic. Almost red-fruited. The black fruit just isn't here for me. 
    8% Cab franc and 4% Petit Verdot
    8.5-9
Mondavi Stags Leap - 100% cabernet, Schweizer vineyard - close to Shafer. 
    2012 - Denser - has blackcurrant unlike the To Kalon. High tannins but it has the stuffing to carry it. Prominent baking spices - oak. 
    Around 8.5-9
    2013 - Lots of clove and baking spice from oak. Has good fruit, but a bit spiced right now. Christmas. Elevated acid, high tannins. 
    Around 8.5-9

Spottswoode Estate
	Used to be on AXR1, 8x10 spacing, but now they're off AXR1 because of phyloxerra - 5'x7' spacing. St. Helena, alluvial soils. It's a warm site. 60% new oak (not 100%). Winemaker must also be the vineyard manager. 

	Rob McCollough: In 2014 - switched to optical sorting. The grapes go through a triple-sorting process. Reject rate is 2-3% of all the fruit harvested. Previously, it was between 3-5% (sorting by hand). This is a small rate. Dominus and Spottswoode use a viticultural tool "Pressure Bomb". 

	There are lots of different techniques of pumping over
		- old way is the "firehose" - very intrusive, violent. Breaks the berries. 
		- as soon as they can, they change to a more gentle pump, introducing oxygen to help the fermentation yeast. 
		- max 2 pumpover per day - each time you do a pumpover, you lose heat. It's the most gentle extraction force. 
		- Some people do 6 pumpovers per day, but that's a crazy amount of work. 
		- First 2 days is violent. Then more gentle. 
		- Once you go to mid-fermentation, you don't need as oxidative pumpovers. 
		- As the cap starts to fall down, they go back to a pump that can handle more solids. 
		- Then they're just wetting the cap each day, and using heat to finish off extraction. 
		- The secret of Spottswoode is gentle irrigation-style pumpover that maximizes heat. 
		- Extraction/pumpovers are decided on a tank-by-tank basis, and go several weeks. In other wineries, they might go shorter - e.g. Mtn. Fruit at Lokoya might go for only 6-10 days. 

	1982's are drinking beautifully - AXR1, 100% cab, 8'x10' spacing. 12.5% alcohol.  

	They inoculate with yeast and then do Malo afterwards. High sugar levels, so they don't want stuck fermentation, and you don't want a "stressed" character - stressed aromas from having to re-inoculate. 

    2012 - Tannic beast. Turbocharged blackcurrant with a twinkle of brown olive. Blackcurrant, blackberry, black olive, slight liquorice, blackcurrant liqueur. Slight toasted popcorn. Elevated acid. Really dense, tart dry finish.
    Around 9.5

    2013 - Also a tannic beast. Similar tightly-controlled but complex black fruit - layered and complex. Similar in structure but more tannic. Feels only around 14%
    Around 9.5

